[DOC-10221] Release notes for v23.2.5 (#18523)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v23.2/v23.2.5.md

## v23.2.5

Release Date: May 7, 2024

{% include releases/new-release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}

<h3 id="v23-2-5-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

> - The new [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) `sql.stats.virtual_computed_columns.enabled` enables collection of table statistics on virtual computed columns. [#120923][#120923]

Author: ```suggestion
- The new [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) [`sql.stats.virtual_computed_columns.enabled`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-sql-stats-virtual-computed-columns-enabled) enables collection of [table statistics]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cost-based-optimizer.md %}#table-statistics) on virtual [computed columns]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/computed-columns.md %}). [#120923][#120923]
```

- The new [session variable]({% link {{ page.version.version}}/session-variables.md %}) `optimizer_use_virtual_computed_column_stats` configures the [optimizer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/make-queries-fast.md %}) to consider table statistics on virtual computed columns. [#121179][#121179]
- The new `FORCE_INVERTED_INDEX` [hint]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/indexes.md %}#selection) configures the [optimizer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/make-queries-fast.md %})  to prefer a query plan scan over any inverted index of the hinted table. If no such query plan can be generated, an error is logged. [#122300][#122300]
- The [optimizer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/make-queries-fast.md %}) can now plan constrained scans over partial indexes in more cases, particularly on partial indexes with predicates referencing virtual computed columns. [#123408][#123408]

<h3 id="v23-2-5-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

> - A minimum Raft scheduler concurrency is now enforced per [store]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md %}#storage) so that a node with many stores does not spread workers too thinly. This avoids high scheduler latency across replicas on a store when load is imbalanced. [#120798][#120798]

Author: ```suggestion
- A minimum [Raft]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/2/architecture/replication-layer.md%}#raft) scheduler concurrency is now enforced per [store]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md %}#storage) so that a node with many stores does not spread workers too thinly. This avoids high scheduler latency across [replicas]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/glossary.md %}#replica) on a store when load is imbalanced. [#120798][#120798]
```

- A [changefeed]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) optimization to reduce duplicates during aggregator restarts has been disabled due to poor performance. [#123596][#123596]

<h3 id="v23-2-5-db-console-changes">DB Console changes</h3>

- The **Commit Latency** chart in the [Changefeed Dashboard]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-cdc-dashboard.md %}) now aggregates by max instead of by sum for multi-node changefeeds. This more accurately reflects the amount of time for events to be acknowledged by the downstream sink. [#121235][#121235]

<h3 id="v23-2-5-bug-fixes">Bug fixes</h3>

- Fixed a slow memory leak when opening many new connections. This bug was introduced in 22.2.9 and 23.1.0. [#121055][#121055]

> - Fixed a bug that occurred when using [`ALTER TABLE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-table.md}) to drop and re-add a CHECK constraint with the same name. [#121055][#121055]

Author: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that occurred when using [`ALTER TABLE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-table.md}) to drop and re-add a [`CHECK` constraint]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/check.md %}) with the same name. [#121055][#121055]
```

> - [Sequence]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/create-sequence.md %}) options `MINVALUE` and `MAXVALUE` automatically adjust to new types bounds. This mirrors the behavior of postgreSQL. [#121309][#121309]

Author: ```suggestion
- [Sequence]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/create-sequence.md %}) options `MINVALUE` and `MAXVALUE` automatically adjust to new types bounds. This mirrors the behavior of PostgreSQL. [#121309][#121309]
```

- Fixed a bug that could prevent timeseries graphs shown on the DB Console SQL Activity [Statement Details]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/statement-details.md %}) page from rendering correctly when specifying a custom time range. [#121383][#121383]
- Fixed a bug present since at least v21.1 that could lead to incorrect evaluation of an `IN` expression with:

>     - `INT2` or `INT4` type on the left side, and

Author: ```suggestion
    - [`INT2` or `INT4`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/int.md %}) type on the left side, and
```

    - Values on the right side that are outside of the range of the left side.

    [#121953][#121953]
- Fixed a leak in reported memory usage (not the actual memory usage) by the internal memory accounting system, the limit for which is configured via the `--max-sql-memory flag` when a long-running sessions issues hundreds of thousands or more transactions. This reporting bug could cause `root: memory budget exceeded` errors for other queries. The bug was introduced in v23.1.17 and v23.2.3. [#121950][#121950]

> - Fixed a bug introduced in v23.2.4 that could prevent collection of table statistics on tables that have virtual computed columns of user-defined type when the newly-introduced [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) `sql.stats.virtual_computed_columns.enabled` is set to `true` (defaults to `false`). The setting is introduced in 23.2.4  and is disabled by default, so only this particular version is affected with non-default setting. [#122319][#122319]

Author: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug introduced in v23.2.4 that could prevent collection of [table statistics]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cost-based-optimizer.md %}#table-statistics) on tables that have on virtual [computed columns]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/computed-columns.md %})  of [user-defined type]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/create-type.md %}) when the newly-introduced [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) `sql.stats.virtual_computed_columns.enabled` is set to `true` (defaults to `false`). The setting was introduced in 23.2.4  and is disabled by default. [#122319][#122319]
```

> - Fixed a bug where a [`GRANT ...ON ALL TABLES`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/grant.md %}) statement could fail if a sequence existed that did not support the privilege being granted. [#122034][#122034]

Author: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where a [`GRANT ... ON ALL TABLES`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/grant.md %}) statement could fail if a sequence existed that did not support the [privilege]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/security-reference/authorization.md %}#privileges) being granted. [#122034][#122034]
```

> - Fixed an existing bug where an unused value cannot be dropped from an [enum]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/enum.md %}) if the enum itself is referenced by a [user-defined function]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/user-defined-functions.md %}). A value can now be dropped from an enum as long as the value itself is not being referenced by any other data element, including a user-defined function. [#121237][#121237]

Author: ```suggestion
- Fixed an existing bug where an unused value cannot be dropped from an [`ENUM`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/enum.md %}) if the`ENUM` itself is referenced by a [user-defined function]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/user-defined-functions.md %}). A value can now be dropped from an`ENUM` as long as the value itself is not being referenced by any other data element, including a user-defined function. [#121237][#121237]
```

## v23.2.5

Release Date: May 7, 2024

{% include releases/new-release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}

<h3 id="v23-2-5-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

> - The new [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) `sql.stats.virtual_computed_columns.enabled` enables collection of table statistics on virtual computed columns. [#120923][#120923]

Reviewer: suggest directly linking to the cluster setting, they all have anchor links 

suggest adding links to table statistics [1] and computed columns [2]

[1]: https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cost-based-optimizer#table-statistics
[2]: https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/computed-columns.html

> - The new [session variable]({% link {{ page.version.version}}/session-variables.md %}) `optimizer_use_virtual_computed_column_stats` configures the [optimizer]({% {{ page.version.version }}/make-queries-fast.md %}) to consider table statistics on virtual computed columns. [#121179][#121179]

Reviewer: 'optimizer' link should be changed to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cost-based-optimizer 

computed columns could be a link to the computed columns docs (see previous comment for link)

> - The new `FORCE_INVERTED_INDEX` [hint]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/indexes.md %}#selection) configures the [optimizer]({% {{ page.version.version }}/make-queries-fast.md %})  to prefer a query plan scan over any inverted index of the hinted table. If no such query plan can be generated, an error is logged. [#122300][#122300]

Reviewer: 'optimizer' link should be changed to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cost-based-optimizer

inverted index should link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/inverted-indexes.html 

there are two spaces between the 'optimizer' link and '.. to prefer a query plan'

'error is logged' could be a link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/logging-overview

> - The [optimizer]({% {{ page.version.version }}/make-queries-fast.md %}) can now plan constrained scans over partial indexes in more cases, particularly on partial indexes with predicates referencing virtual computed columns. [#123408][#123408]

Reviewer: same comment as above re: the optimizer link should be to the optimizer page (link provided in previous comment)

'partial indexes' could be linked to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/partial-indexes 

'computed' columns' could be a link to those docs (link already provided)

<h3 id="v23-2-5-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

> - A minimum Raft scheduler concurrency is now enforced per [store]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md %}#storage) so that a node with many stores does not spread workers too thinly. This avoids high scheduler latency across replicas on a store when load is imbalanced. [#120798][#120798]

Reviewer: 'Raft' can be a link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/replication-layer.html#raft 

'replicas' can be a link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/glossary#replica

- A [changefeed]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) optimization to reduce duplicates during aggregator restarts has been disabled due to poor performance. [#123596][#123596]

<h3 id="v23-2-5-db-console-changes">DB Console changes</h3>

- The **Commit Latency** chart in the [Changefeed Dashboard]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-cdc-dashboard.md %}) now aggregates by max instead of by sum for multi-node changefeeds. This more accurately reflects the amount of time for events to be acknowledged by the downstream sink. [#121235][#121235]

<h3 id="v23-2-5-bug-fixes">Bug fixes</h3>

> - Fixed a slow memory leak when opening many new connections. This bug was introduced in 22.2.9 and 23.1.0. [#121055][#121055]

Reviewer: 'connections' could be a link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/connect-to-your-cluster.html

version numbers should have a 'v' at the front, e.g. v22.2.9 and v23.1.0

Author: I'll link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/connect-to-the-database.html instead of the CC page.
```suggestion
- Fixed a slow memory leak when opening many new [connections]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/connect-to-the-database.md %}. This bug was introduced in 22.2.9 and 23.1.0. [#121055][#121055]
```

> - Fixed a bug that occurred when using [`ALTER TABLE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-table.md}) to drop and re-add a CHECK constraint with the same name. [#121055][#121055]

Reviewer: 'CHECK constraint' can link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/check.html

> - [Sequence]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/create-sequence.md %}) options `MINVALUE` and `MAXVALUE` automatically adjust to new types bounds. This mirrors the behavior of postgreSQL. [#121309][#121309]

Reviewer: typo: "PostgreSQL" should be capitalized

- Fixed a bug that could prevent timeseries graphs shown on the DB Console SQL Activity [Statement Details]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/statement-details.md %}) page from rendering correctly when specifying a custom time range. [#121383][#121383]
- Fixed a bug present since at least v21.1 that could lead to incorrect evaluation of an `IN` expression with:

>     - `INT2` or `INT4` type on the left side, and

Reviewer: `INT2` could link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/int.html

    - Values on the right side that are outside of the range of the left side.

    [#121953][#121953]

> - Fixed a leak in reported memory usage (not the actual memory usage) by the internal memory accounting system, the limit for which is configured via the `--max-sql-memory flag` when a long-running sessions issues hundreds of thousands or more transactions. This reporting bug could cause `root: memory budget exceeded` errors for other queries. The bug was introduced in v23.1.17 and f23.2.3. [#121950][#121950]

Reviewer: suggest making 'max-sql-memory' a link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cockroach-start#flags 

suggest linking 'transactions' to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/transactions.html

> - Fixed a bug introduced in v23.2.4 that could prevent collection of table statistics on tables that have virtual computed columns of user-defined type when the newly-introduced [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) `sql.stats.virtual_computed_columns.enabled` is set to `true` (defaults to `false`). The setting is introduced in 23.2.4  and is disabled by default, so only this particular version is affected with non-default setting. [#122319][#122319]

Reviewer: suggest making 'table statistics', 'computed columns' links to those docs (provided in previous comments)

suggest making cluster settings link a direct anchor link 

version should have a 'v' prepended, e.g. v23.2.4 

suggest 'user-defined type' link to  https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-type

> - Fixed a bug where a [`GRANT ...ON ALL TABLES`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/grant.md %}) statement could fail if a sequence existed that did not support the privilege being granted. [#122034][#122034]

Reviewer: need a space after `...ON ALL` should be `... ON ALL`

'sequence' could link to sequence docs (you have one elsewhere in here)

'privilege' could link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/security-reference/authorization#privileges

> - Fixed an existing bug where an unused value cannot be dropped from an [enum]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/enum.md %}) if the enum itself is referenced by a [user-defined function]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/user-defined-functions.md %}). A value can now be dropped from an enum as long as the value itself is not being referenced by any other data element, including a user-defined function. [#121237][#121237]

Reviewer: mentions of 'enum' should probably be `ENUM` ?

<div class="release-note-contributors" markdown="1">

<h3 id="v23-2-5-contributors">Contributors</h3>

This release includes 79 merged PRs by 33 authors.

> We would like to thank the following contributors from the CockroachDB community:

Reviewer: this section should end after "33 authors."

we no longer list the "thank the following contributors" stuff, since internal folks use different non-work emails and show up in this list - probably other reasons too but that's the one I remember
